APM > .NET > Custom instrumentation updates (#13820)
DataDog/documentation: content/en/tracing/setup_overview/custom_instrumentation/dotnet.md

      text: '.NET code samples'
---
<div class="alert alert-info">
For instructions on how to setup the .NET Tracer and enable automatic instrumentation, see the <a href="https://docs.datadoghq.com/tracing/setup/dotnet-framework/">.NET Framework setup instructions</a> or the <a href="https://docs.datadoghq.com/tracing/setup/dotnet-core/">.NET Core setup instructions</a>.
</div>

> This page details common use cases for adding and customizing observability with Datadog APM. Custom instrumentation is supported on **.NET Framework 4.6.1+** for Windows, on **.NET Core 2.0+** for Windows and Linux, and on **.NET 5** and **.NET 6** for Windows and Linux. To perform the steps outlined below, you may need to add NuGet package references to one or more of the following libraries:

Reviewer: I don't think we should list compatibility here, but only refer people to the compatibility requirement page.
That will allow us not to forget this when we udapte compatibility requirements.

- `Datadog.Trace` [NuGet package][3]: This library provides an API to directly access the Tracer and the active span. **Note:** When simultaneously using the `Datadog.Trace` NuGet package and automatic instrumentation, it is important to keep the versions in sync.
- `Datadog.Trace.Annotations` [NuGet package][4]: This library provides .NET attributes that can be applied to your code to enable additional automatic instrumentation features.

## Adding tags

Add custom [span tags][5] to your [spans][6] to customize your observability within Datadog.  The span tags are applied to your incoming traces, allowing you to correlate observed behavior with code-level information such as merchant tier, checkout amount, or user ID.

### Add custom span tags

<div class="alert alert-warning">

>   <strong>Note:</strong> This requires adding the `Datadog.Trace` NuGet package to your application.

Author: All of the alerts with the "this" wording are listing requirements for a particular section to be applicable. Have you seen prior art for this?

>   <strong>Note:</strong> This requires adding the `Datadog.Trace` NuGet package to your application.

Author: Would it be too vague to say the following?

> "This feature requires adding the `Datadog.Trace` NuGet package to your application"

>   <strong>Note:</strong> This requires adding the `Datadog.Trace` NuGet package to your application.

Reviewer 2: "This feature" is fine, yes. Thanks!

This sets three tags on the span: `"error.msg":exception.Message`,  `"error.stack":exception.ToString()`, and `"error.type":exception.GetType().ToString()`.

## Adding spans

If you aren’t using a supported framework instrumentation for [.NET Framework][6] or [.NET Core][7], or you would like additional depth in your application's [traces][8], you may want to add custom instrumentation to your code for complete flame graphs or to measure execution times for pieces of code.

If modifying application code is not possible, use the environment variable `DD_TRACE_METHODS` to detail these methods.

If you have existing `[Trace]` or similar attributes, or prefer to use attributes to complete any incomplete traces within Datadog, use Trace Annotations.

### Datadog trace methods

<div class="alert alert-warning">
  <strong>Note:</strong> This requires enabling automatic instrumentation for your application.
</div>

Using the `DD_TRACE_METHOD` environment variable, you can get visibility into unsupported frameworks without changing application code.

```ini

> DD_TRACE_METHODS=Store.SessionManager[SaveSession]

Reviewer 3: I think we should call out that this is `fully.qualified.classname[method]` somewhere

Author: Updated in 9d9f257385b6d6923aeb485384b52552ab262f90 . Does that look good?

```

> The only difference between this approach and using `[Trace]` attributes is the customization options for the operation and resource names.  With DD Trace Methods, `operationName` is `trace.annotation` and `resourceName` is `SaveSession`.

Reviewer 3: Didn't we change the resource names to be `SessionManager.SaveSession` here?

Author: Not yet...that's about to be merged in our repo so it's not in the publicly available Tracer yet

This sets three tags on the span: `"error.msg":exception.Message`,  `"error.stack":exception.ToString()`, and `"error.type":exception.GetType().ToString()`.

## Adding spans

If you aren’t using a supported framework instrumentation for [.NET Framework][6] or [.NET Core][7], or you would like additional depth in your application's [traces][8], you may want to add custom instrumentation to your code for complete flame graphs or to measure execution times for pieces of code.

If modifying application code is not possible, use the environment variable `DD_TRACE_METHODS` to detail these methods.

If you have existing `[Trace]` or similar attributes, or prefer to use attributes to complete any incomplete traces within Datadog, use Trace Annotations.

> ### Datadog trace methods

Author: Updated to `Instrument methods via configuration`. WDYT?

> ### Datadog trace methods

Reviewer: I've just seen those comments :) Yes perfect.

<div class="alert alert-warning">

>   <strong>Note:</strong> This requires enabling automatic instrumentation for your application.

Reviewer 2: Same as above, avoid a naked "This" pronoun.

Maybe this wording instead?
> Enable automatic instrumentation for your application to instrument methods via configuration.

</div>

Using the `DD_TRACE_METHOD` environment variable, you can get visibility into unsupported frameworks without changing application code. For full details on the input format, see the [.NET Framework setup instructions][9] or the [.NET Core setup instructions][10]. For the following example, assume that the desired method to instrument is named `SaveSession` and the method is defined on the `Store.Managers.SessionManager` type:

```ini
DD_TRACE_METHODS=Store.Managers.SessionManager[SaveSession]
```

> The only difference between this approach and using `[Trace]` attributes is the customization options for the operation and resource names.  With DD Trace Methods, `operationName` is `trace.annotation` and `resourceName` is `SaveSession`.

Reviewer: I've just seen those comments :) Yes perfect.

### Instrument methods via attributes

<div class="alert alert-warning">

>   <strong>Note:</strong> This requires adding the `Datadog.Trace.Annotations` NuGet package and enabling automatic instrumentation for your application.

Reviewer 2: Unclear "This" pronoun.

Suggestion:
> Add the `Datadog.Trace.Annotations` NuGet package and enable automatic instrumentation for your application to instrument methods via attributes.

</div>

Add `[Trace]` to methods to have them be traced when running with automatic instrumentation. If automatic instrumentation is not enabled, this attribute has no effect on your application.

`[Trace]` attributes have the default operation name `trace.annotation` and resource name of the traced method. These can be set as named arguments of the `[Trace]` attribute to better reflect what is being instrumented.  These are the only possible arguments that can be set for the `[Trace]` attribute.

```csharp
using Datadog.Trace.Annotations;

namespace Store.Managers
{
    public class SessionManager
    {
        [Trace(OperationName = "database.persist", ResourceName = "SessionManager.SaveSession")]
        public static void SaveSession()
        {
            // your method implementation here
        }
    }
}
```

### Manually creating a new span

<div class="alert alert-warning">

>   <strong>Note:</strong> This requires adding the `Datadog.Trace` NuGet package to your application.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  <strong>Note:</strong> Add the `Datadog.Trace` NuGet package to your application before manually creating a new span.
```

Or use other phrasing consistent with the other alerts, but avoid the unclear "This" pronoun.

}
```

## Trace client and Agent configuration

> There are additional configurations possible for both the tracing client and Datadog Agent for context propagation and for excluding specific Resources from sending traces to Datadog in the event these traces are not wanted to count in metrics calculated, such as Health Checks.

Author: This line was based on the language in the Java documentation, though I think it can be improved. I'm happy to hear any suggestions/recommendations on this

Reviewer 2: Or you can take this line out? It is largely covered by the section just below on Resource Filtering.

Author: Removed 👍🏼
